---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/writing-journey/","dgShowBacklinks":true}
---

# A writing journey
As far as I can remember I've always enjoyed writing. As a kid I wrote stories, journals (many started, none finished), one time a comic book that I made the drawings for myself ... Essays were my favourite school assignments. I must have been somewhat good at it, too. My report on a spelunking expedition we undertook in fifth grade, which I approached in a tongue-in-cheek way by summarising the various reasons I had hated it, *killed* when I was asked to read it aloud in class.

Back then when people asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up, I told them I wanted to be a writer. If that didn't pan out, I would train to be either the king's chef or his chief violinist. (Every king needs one, natch.) I let that dream go by the time I was at secondary school, though I did keep up writing, made somewhat easier by the fact that my family now owned a computer. 

I loved it. I took to it immediately, to play games, to go through the content on some educational CD-ROMs we had or to do homework, standard stuff, but I was also messing around with a fractals generator my father had installed in DOS and creating stuff with a piece of audio and video editing software that had come with the device. I don't know what I used Notepad for, but I remember I did, a lot. I would also randomly change the computer's settings multiple times over, angering my father in the process. I just wanted to try it all out.  After some time I knew that thing better than anybody else in the house.

One of the files on that computer that was mine was a Word doc with story ideas, as well as drafts of some of the stories themselves. I made a cover page for it and then printed it out, using the expensive color ink for it. I think about a third of the time I spent on our computer was spent writing in some way or other. As I got older, I gradually moved away from fiction and would only write some to enter the annual writing competition my teachers wanted me to enter. But I was still writing, and looking for an outlet.

The very first writing-for-the-web project I undertook was a website about the country of Uganda. I was a prepubescent teen then, a weird and awkward kid with some unusaul interests,[^1] and I'd become fascinated by the country after reading a [comic book](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_dorpstiran_van_Boeloe_Boeloe) set in a fictional nation that was based on it. I did my own research - my father's full set of the Winkler Prins encyclopedia proved essential in this endeavour - and I started writing about the country's history, geography, nature ... with the purpose of publishing it online at some point.

I never got that far - at the time I had to take my bike to the local library every time I wanted to get on the internet, access to which was doled out in half-hour blocks only - but I did have a little program on our home computer that I could use to lay-out the pages and create hyperlinks between them, as well as fashion a little menu to tie the whole website together. Or maybe I just designed it in Word, memory fails me on this point. But I was inspired by the GeoCities websites I'd visited, tried to imitate what I'd seen and liked on there as best I could with my limited resources.[^2]

As it stood, it would take a couple more years until anything I wrote actually made its way to the web. That was at university, where I started to blog, first on Blogger, then Wordpress and eventually LiveJournal. The first two I had trouble motivating myself to maintain; I wanted them to be great, well-written and -researched, but at the same time felt deeply insecure about anything I produced. On LJ I found my niche. The site is something in between a blog and a social network and I had a lot of fun writing something in between what I then considered typical blog content (semi-but-not-quite journalistic) and more personal writing.

I wrote book reviews, movie reviews and TV recaps or expressed my thoughts and opinions on things like politics and LGBTQI+ issues, but just as often I would just describe the minutiae that make up the bulk of my life. I did all of this without (too much) fear of being called out for not being enough of an expert to have a say on any of it.[^3] I was proud of some of what I produced, and I definitely tried to do it well, but hindsight is 20/20: the real joy I had in doing it came from just being creative, getting stuff out there, stuff that I liked and had enjoyed getting down, and not caring too much about what people's opinions might be.[^4] 

Then a Russian company bought LiveJournal and made some unpopular changes. People started to leave and I followed them over to Tumblr, which then was the new kid on the block. I was a keen reblogger on there, but my original output dwindled. I kept my Tumblr blog up for a couple of years, until I accidentally locked myself out of my account - a mishap with multi-factor authentication - and Tumblr refused to believe I was, in fact, still me.[^5] 

So that was that. I didn't stop writing exactly (at this point I'm sure I couldn't if I tried), but the little of it I have done since has been very intermittent - as it was already in my Tumblr days - and saved only as personal notes. For as long as that has been the case, however, I've longed to get back into the habit of publishing part of what I write online. A desire for perfection, for at least a facade of professionalism, held me back. I came up with ambitious plans, created long todo lists for them stopping only short of a Gantt chart, meanwhile never got beyond writing the about-section and failing to even deliver a version of that that I considered worthy. Basically, I lost track of what had made writing online fun for me.

I left things as they were, not knowing how to get out of that rut. Until about a year ago I happened upon the concept of a digital garden. I don't remember how I encountered it or which digital garden I first visited, but I remember [Maggie Appleton](https://maggieappleton.com/)s and [Tom Critchlow](https://tomcritchlow.com/wiki/)'s to have been among the first. I was immediately fascinated, drawn in by the freedom and flexibility that the concept offered. 

I did not have to start another blog! In fact the limitations of and frustrations around blogging had led some people to come up with something different, something more akin to the arts-and-crafts feel of the early internet that I so adored. In a way, more akin to that GeoCities website I once planned so meticulously. A seed (pardon the pun) was planted. And while it took me another year to get anything up and running, to be sure, here we are now, I'm finally doing it. 

As to what a digital garden is, MIT Technology Review also has a nice write-up [over here](https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/09/03/1007716/digital-gardens-let-you-cultivate-your-own-little-bit-of-the-internet/). And Maggie Appleton wrote a short [history of the digital garden](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history). Great reads if you're interested. As to what mine is, I try to explain all of that [[manifesto (old)\|here]].

[^1]: One more example: I made up fictional TV channels and created schedules for them in Excell.
[^2]: It strikes me that almost from the moment I went online the first time at our local library I was looking for a space of my own on it to share things that I was making. I have had several of those spaces (and given them up a lot of them again) since, but I was never aware of how far back that really goes.
[^3]: I still did my research, but on Blogger and Wordpress I put the bar so high for myself - I really wanted to come across as an expert of sorts on whatever I wrote about - that I didn't really get much writing done at all. On LJ I learned to leave well enough alone.
[^4]: Full disclosure: of *course* I enjoyed positive feedback and got frustrated with the odd negative comment. After all I'm only human. But it didn't stop me in my tracks like it would have before.
[^5]: My Tumblr is [still out there](https://mrhappyboots.tumblr.com/) now, frozen in time. My LJ was locked - only LJ users that I approved could read it - and I've deleted it since, though I do still have an archive of my posts.